Why Study Data Structures and Algorithms ?
The computer scientist Nicklaus Wirth wrote a computer programming textbook titled
Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs (Prentice-Hall).
That title is the essence of computer programming. Any computer program that goes beyond the trivial “Hello,world!” will usually require some type of structure to manage the data the program is written to manipulate, along with one or more algorithms for translating the data from its input form to its output form

An example of a data structure that leads to efficient algorithms is the binary search tree
(BST). A binary search tree is designed so that it is easy to find the minimum and
maximum values of a set of data, yielding an algorithm that is more efficient than the
best search algorithms available. Programmers unfamiliar with BSTs will instead prob‐
ably use a simpler data structure that ends up being less efficient.

r. For example, there are at least six or seven ways
to sort a list of data, but knowing that the Quicksort algorithm is more efficient than
the selection sort algorithm will lead to a much more efficient sorting process. Or that
it’s fairly easy to implement a sequential or linear search algorithm for a list of data, but
knowing that the binary sort algorithm can sometimes be twice as efficient as the se‐
quential search will lead to a better program


THE JAVASCRIPT ENVIRONMENT
JavaScript has historically been a programming language that ran only inside a web
browser. However, in the past few years, there has been the development of JavaScript
programming environments that can be run from the desktop, or similarly, from a
server. In this book we use one such environment: the JavaScript shell that is part of
Mozilla’s comprehensive JavaScript environment known as SpiderMonkey


DECLARING AND INTIALIZING VARIABLES
- JavaScript variables are global by default and, strictly speaking, don’t have to be declared
before using. When a JavaScript variable is initialized without first being declared, it
becomes a global variable.

compiled languages such as C++ and Java


var number;
var name;
var rate = 1.2;
var greeting = "Hello, world!";
var flag = false;


Arithmetic and Math Library Functions in JavaScript

JavaScript utilizes the standard arithmetic operators:
• + (addition)
• - (subtraction)
• * (multiplication)
• / (division)
• % (modulo)


Example 1-1 shows some examples of performing arithmetic in JavaScript, as well as
examples of using several of the mathematical functions.
Example 1-1. Arithmetic and math functions in JavaScript

var x = 3;
var y = 1.1;
console.log(x + y);
console.log(x * y);
console.log((x+y)*(x-y));
var z = 9;
console.log(Math.sqrt(z));
console.log(Math.abs(y/x));

Output :-
4.1
3.3000000000000003
7.789999999999999
3
0.3666666666666667


var x = 3;
var y = 1.1;
var z = x * y;
console.log(z.toFixed(2)); // displays 3.30


Decision Constructs

Decision Constructs
Decision constructs allow our programs to make decisions on what programming
statements to execute based on a Boolean expression. The two decision constructs we
use in this book are the if statement and the switch statement.

The if statement comes in three forms:
• The simple if statement
• The if-else statement
• The if-else if statement

Example 1-2 shows how to write a simple if statement.
Example 1-2. The simple if statement
var mid = 25;
var high = 50;
var low = 1;
var current = 13;
var found = -1;
if (current < mid) {
 mid = (current-low) / 2;
}


Example 1-3 demonstrates the if-else statement.

Example 1-3. The if-else statement
var mid = 25;
var high = 50;
var low = 1;
var current = 13;
var found = -1;
if (current < mid) {
 mid = (current-low) / 2;
}
else {
 mid = (current+high) / 2;
}

Example 1-4 illustrates the if-else if statement.

var mid = 25;
var high = 50;
var low = 1;
var current = 13;
var found = -1;
if (current < mid) {
 mid = (current-low) / 2;
}
else if (current > mid) {
 mid = (current+high) / 2;
}
else {
 found = current;
}


Example 1-5. The switch statement
putstr("Enter a month number: ");
var monthNum = readline();
var monthName;
switch (monthNum) {
 case "1":
 monthName = "January";
 break;
 case "2":
 monthName = "February";
 break;
 case "3":
 monthName = "March";
 break;
 case "4":
 monthName = "April";
 break;
 case "5":
 monthName = "May";
 break;
 case "6":
 monthName = "June";
 break;
 case "7":
monthName = "July";
 break;
 case "8":
 monthName = "August";
 break;
 case "9":
 monthName = "September";
 break;
 case "10":
 monthName = "October";
 break;
 case "11":
 monthName = "November";
 break;
 case "12":
 monthName = "December";
 break;
 default:
 console.log("Bad input");
};

Repetition Constructs
Many of the algorithms we study in this book are repetitive in nature. We use two
repetition constructs in this book—the while loop and the for loop.


Example 1-6 demonstrates how the while loop works.

var number = 1;
var sum = 0;
while (number < 11) {
 sum += number;
 ++number;
}
console.log(sum); // displays 55

When we want to execute a set of statements a specified number of times, we use a for
loop. Example 1-7 uses a for loop to sum the integers 1 through 10.

var number = 1;
var sum = 0;
for (var number = 1; number < 11; number++) {
 sum += number;
}
console.log(sum); // displays 55

for loops are also used frequently to access the elements of an array, as shown in
Example 1-8.
Example 1-8. Using a for loop with an array
var numbers = [3, 7, 12, 22, 100];
var sum = 0;
for (var i = 0; i < numbers.length; ++i) {
 sum += numbers[i];
}
console.log(sum); // displays 144


Functions
JavaScript provides the means to define both value-returning functions and functions
that don’t return values (sometimes called subprocedures or void functions).

Example 1-9 demonstrates how value-returning functions are defined and called in
JavaScript.

function factorial(number) {
  var product = 1;
  for (var i = number; i >= 1; --i) {
    product *= i;
  }
  return product;
}


console.log(factorial(3)) //6


Example 1-10 illustrates how to write a function that is used not for its return value, but
for the operations it performs.


function curve(arr, amount) {
  for (var i = 0; i < arr.length; ++i) {
    arr[i] += amount;
  }
}


var grades = [1,2,3,4,5]
curve(grades, 1)

console.log(grades) //[ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ]


Variable Scope

The scope of a variable refers to where in a program a variable’s value can be accessed.
The scope of a variable in JavaScript is defined as function scope. This means that a
variable’s value is visible within the function definition where the variable is declared
and defined and within any functions that are nested within that function.
When a variable is defined outside of a function, in the main program, the variable is
said to have global scope, which means its value can be accessed by any part of a program,
including functions. The following short program demonstrates how global scope
works:
function showScope() {
 return scope;
}
var scope = "global";
console.log(scope); // displays "global"
console.log(showScope()); // displays "global"

The function showScope() can access the variable scope because scope is a global vari‐
able. Global variables can be declared at any place in a program, either before or after
function definitions.

Now watch what happens when we define a second scope variable within the show
Scope() function:
function showScope() {
 var scope = "local";
 return scope;
}
var scope = "global";
print(scope); // displays "global"
print(showScope()); // displays "local"

The scope variable defined in the showScope() function has local scope, while the scope
variable defined in the main program is a global variable. Even though the two variables
have the same name, their scopes are different, and their values are different when
accessed within the area of the program where they are defined.

All of this behavior is normal and expected. However, it can all change if you leave off
the keyword var in the variable definitions. JavaScript allows you to define variables
without using the var keyword, but when you do, that variable automatically has global
scope, even if defined within a function.

Example 1-11 demonstrates the ramifications of leaving off the var keyword when
defining variables.

function showScope() {
 scope = "local";
 return scope;
}
scope = "global";
print(scope); // displays "global"
print(showScope()); // displays "local"
print(scope); // displays "local"


In Example 1-11, because the scope variable inside the function is not declared with the
var keyword, when the string "local" is assigned to the variable, we are actually chang‐
ing the value of the scope variable in the main program. You should always begin every
definition of a variable with the var keyword to keep things like this from happening



Recursion :-
Function calls can be made recursively in JavaScript. The factorial() function defined
earlier can also be written recursively, like this:

*shallow recursive call :-

function factorial(number) {
  if (number === 1) {
    return number;
  } else {
    return number * factorial(number - 1);
  }
}

console.log(factorial(5));

5 * factorial(4)
5 * 4 * factorial(3)
5 * 4 * 3 * factorial(2)
5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * factorial(1)
5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1
5 * 4 * 3 * 2
5 * 4 * 6
5 * 24
120


Objects and Object-Oriented Programming

Objects are created by defining a constructor function that includes declarations for an
object’s properties and functions, followed by definitions for the functions.

function Checking(amount) {
 this.balance = amount; // property
 this.deposit = deposit; // function
 this.withdraw = withdraw; // function
 this.toString = toString; // function
}


The this keyword is used to tie each function and property to an object instance. Now
let’s look at the function definitions for the preceding declarations:


function deposit(amount) {
 this.balance += amount;
}
function withdraw(amount) {
 if (amount <= this.balance) {
 this.balance -= amount;
 }
 if (amount > this.balance) {
 print("Insufficient funds");
 }
}
function toString() {
 return "Balance: " + this.balance;
}


Again, we have to use the this keyword with the balance property in order for the
interpreter to know which object’s balance property we are referencing.

Example 1-12. Defining and using the Checking object

function Checking(amount) {
 this.balance = amount;
 this.deposit = deposit;
 this.withdraw = withdraw;
 this.toString = toString;
}
function deposit(amount) {
 this.balance += amount;
}
function withdraw(amount) {
 if (amount <= this.balance) {
 this.balance -= amount;
 }
 if (amount > this.balance) {
 print("Insufficient funds");
 }
}

function toString() {
 return "Balance: " + this.balance;
}
var account = new Checking(500);
account.deposit(1000);
print(account.toString()); // Balance: 1500
account.withdraw(750);
print(account.toString()); // Balance: 750
account.withdraw(800); // displays "Insufficient funds"
print(account.toString()); // Balance: 750

